Very interesting because of Carlisle's whole relationship to German literature and German thought.
You know, it's a very interesting connection there.
At any rate, I then wrote a note to Hugh Trevor Roper.
I was a student, a graduate student, and said, you say that this book was Hitler's favorite book.
I just want you to know I have his copy of the book with his book plate,
And he wrote back, and he said, yes, it was clearly a favorite book, and would you like to come by for tea, and I'd like to see the book.
He wanted, obviously, to see whether it had annotations in addition to everything else.
It has no annotations.
Of course, I checked that.
I was a young scholar.
That would have interested me greatly.
The only thing I could tell was that Hitler, someone at any rate, had read the book carefully, because the ribbon with the top edge was gilt, and the ribbon, you could see that
It had been moved all the way through and made marks all the way through in a regular.
It had been read from beginning to end.
Yeah, read from beginning to end.
You could tell that.
And so I had tea with Hugh Trevor Roper, and he said, oh, yes, this, and he looked at it and everything.
It was very interesting.
This was before, as I mentioned, he had later authenticated the Diaries of Hitler, and he lost his credibility for authenticating things, I'm afraid.
I went back.
Your book quite is pretty persuasive.
Yeah, yeah.
I went back, and then we had our... The next thing that happened was, as a member of the Oxford Society of Bibliophiles, we had that term's final meeting, which was always held in John Sparrow's lodgings as a warden of all souls.
And so we had a meeting with John Sparrow.
Everybody's supposed to bring a favorite book.
And John Sparrow had that habit always of, once you showed your book,
then he would go upstairs to his personal library and bring down something better.
If you had a first edition, he had an inscribed copy.
If you had an inscribed copy, the same author.
If you had an inscribed copy, you had an inscribed with a person's mother.
I hardly ever saw him stumped.
But I gave this copy, and then he sat, and he said, I'm sorry, I don't have anything to match this.
He said, I do have a copy of
Mein Kampf first edition, but he said, I can hardly bring that down to show.
And then he said, Mr. Mitchell, we never, I'm going to ask you a question we never asked at the Society of WFIL, which you guessed, how much did that cost?
And I said, well, it was five pounds.
And he said, if you give it to me, I can tell you how much Mags paid for it in 45, because their code word was harlequin.
He looked in the back, and they had paid three pounds for it.
The letters were such.
Twenty years earlier.
Three pounds, twenty years earlier, they'd take one.
He's still fed up on eBay today, 80 books.
Yeah, yeah.
That's right.
So, uh... Where did Sparrow's collection go, by the way?
I'm not sure about his own collection.
He was quite a collector.
But this killer collection must have gone someplace.
Yeah.
I don't know.
That's a good question.
I actually helped in the sense of anybody he knew, interested in books, he'd have him look out.
I remember he was asking me to look out for something that I found that he was able to purchase and add to his collection.
But that was it.
Then the other thing was that I have kept it with me, of course.
It's for the Lilly Library, but I have it still myself at the moment.
And I had it in my home, and that's when I brought in a friend of mine, a colleague, Alvin Rosenfeld, who's the head of Jewish studies, and written a book on Hitler and the Holocaust and literature.
And there was a... I had not really meant to shock him.
I just thought he'd be interested, and I was going to sort of surprise him by showing him a book without telling him in advance.
Now, here's a book from Hitler's library.
So I said, I think you might be interested in this book, and I handed it to him.
And he said, oh, like, very interesting.
And then he opened it and just went white and started to tremble.
And I hadn't realized that it might even be considered
cruel or something on my part, or certainly thoughtless or tactless, to spring a book like that on someone who was so deeply connected with the whole suffering of the Jewish people and the Holocaust.
And so we talked about it, and I told him, and so forth.
And then he went back, and he wrote a story, eventually, a short story, published, I think, in... It was published in a periodical, and I have to find the name of it.
I can't remember.
Oh, that was the name under which I sold books when I heard these things.
So in this periodical, Alvin Rosenfeld wrote a fictional story about a man who's invited to a supposed friend's house and then suddenly shown, without any warning, a copy of a book that belonged to Hibner and what the emotional reaction was.
And because they haven't come to get me yet, you were saying that all the books from the Tricking the Mind of Man exhibition, one thing they all have in common is that they look backwards
And then you said, well, what about the books that look forward?
And that's where the conversation ended.
What were you suggesting there?
No, I was just meaning that once you have this canon established, the canon is always something that is like Monday Morning Quarterback.
we look back on in order to decide what those books are, but they're books that have had, you know, their impact is finished, so in a sense, they're books not finished, of course their impact continues, but somehow that whole thing is a matter of establishing a canon and you look back at it.
When you start to think about what the future is, what are the books of the future to look forward, I only meant by that
Understanding now.
What is it now?
We try to collect here books that we think 300 years from now people will care about.
And do you actually follow that principle?
I mean, are you looking ahead 300 years?
Yes, absolutely.
This is why we collect on standing orders such a broad range of British and American authors, for example, because we want 300 years from now someone
who says, oh, the great author of the early 20th century was X. We'd like to have all the first editions of that author in very nice condition, not to have missed out on them totally some way.
So broadly collecting is one way.
But another one I think I mentioned was that we did buy the first edition of Mao's Little Red Book.
There probably aren't a lot of libraries looking for that or collecting it right now.
I think there's no doubt, but what if there's a printing
and the Mind of Man extension, that's got to be one of the books that would be interesting to be in such a collection.
And also, you want things that are global now.
Most of our printing in the Mind of Man has been really Eurocentric in the past.
The future is going to be much more global, and therefore work like Mao coming out of China is going to be important.
And there are probably important things appearing around the world that we'll be interested in, too.
Does that mean to draw you into this?
Yeah.
debate, but when you talk about global books, will they have to be printed books, do you think?
That kind of an impact can come from an artifact.
No, and it is a different question of how we deal with preserving the future in rare books and manuscripts.
Well, we have many authors now who say to me, you want my papers, does that mean you want the discs?
also, or you want my electronic files, you want my email.
Right now I'm saying, yes, send us your disks and copy out your emails or send them by attachment, whatever.
That's the correspondence we have, and we have to figure out how to preserve it.
But I think I'm one of the people who believes that the book will last forever.
The book is such a wonderful thing, and it has so much to it beyond the text itself.
The physical artifact of the book is absolutely, I think, going to last for hundreds of years.
It's only the second day I go on this camera, but I don't have anything hard.
This is all zeros and ones.
I don't have a negative.
Yeah.
And I have quite an archive of photographs.
I'm dealing with it.
I'm going to make hard copies.
I have to.
You better make hard copies.
Otherwise, transfer it over to a hard disk or something.
You see in these disks, actually, the disks mostly eventually are going to be useless, but there'll be no machine that can play those disks.
Absolutely true.
So I say print out on nice paper.
We'll print out what we can of everything.
It's like those old faxes.
We have to make copies on archival papers of faxes.
They're fading.
almost unreadable now, many important things that were facts.
And now we have to take care of that.
Napoleon was a great leader.
Yeah.
And I wonder if it's been documented how any of his books might have influenced any of his books.
You had mentioned Mussolini and Mussolini's copy of Machiavelli.
Yeah, being up in Canada with somebody up in Canada.
I'm trying to think.
Malcolm Bradbury, whose papers we have here, wrote a book called To the Hermitage, and one of the ways that he got into the book, you'd find it interesting to read, was he was interested in the library at the time, too, and what had happened to some of the books from St.
Petersburg and had been in the Royal Library and so forth.
The history of libraries and what happens to them, of course, obviously, is fascinating.
But what I'm thinking about in terms of printing in the mind of men and to be open to at least thinking about beyond literature itself and certainly beyond British and American literature, what works are important in the history of the mind that we should be getting right now or recognizing right now.
One of the things I mentioned was there are important developments in philosophy, for instance, which
I think the lily is behind on, we need to catch up with.
So there'll be major developments in philosophy in the 20th century.
One reason that I like John Ranofsky as a bookseller is because he's opened up to and done catalogs in some new areas that people should be collecting in if they haven't been.
He's done a nice catalog on philosophy, for instance, and philosophical things.
He's just interested, I think, in a broader range of what is worth preserving than the traditional range of British and American literature.
You get a new bookseller in one of my books, instead of the old cast of characters.
John's always interesting, too, because he's a controversial character, because he almost single-handedly has raised the level of cost of the market and so forth.
A lot of people have found that the sorts of prices he puts on things
have skewed the market upward, makes it more difficult for them to buy and sell, but he's gone out in areas in which nobody's collecting anything and put out catalogs and tried to create collectors as authors try to create readers, and he has done that, and he puts prices on them that he thinks they're worth.
I mean, he'll say, you know, this is the first edition of this philosophical work inscribed
to another philosopher, you know, this should be a $2,000 book.
Well, it may be a book that is selling for $50 anywhere else.
He's putting down the prices that he thinks they're... That's a good question.
We've covered it.
Okay, yeah, that'll spare it.
Oh, this was Samuel Beckett's copy of King Lear.
Well, first of all, this is my opinion, but I think it's true.
Samuel Beckett is the most important dramatist of the 20th century.
He's had a greater influence, a greater impact, a greater figure in 20th century literature than any other dramatist.
You can think of Bertolt Brecht or George Bernard Shaw or something, nobody.
And he only wrote in the second half of the 20th century.
So we have what I consider, the person I consider to be the greatest dramatist of the 20th century.
And this is his copy of one of the greatest works of dramatic literature, Shakespeare.
Shakespeare clearly had an impact on Beckett, as Shakespeare had an impact on every important writer.
And this notion that here's a book that he read when he was a schoolboy, and that he wrote in, and he annotated, and he practiced his signature in, you know.
And who's the woman who owns this book, Helen?
Helen, now I can't think of her last name, because we're always just first name, and I can't speak, but...
Yeah, she has the book, and the story of it is that she loved Beckett, and we often talked about Beckett, even before I became director of the Lily.
But she went back home to get some of her school books from her childhood home, just to have them because of sentimental attachment, having no idea that her copy of King Lear that she used in school and bought from a used bookstore was Samuel Beckett's copy.
She had read it and used it so long ago before she ever knew Beckett from her home in Ireland.
I'm not sure what city it was in.
So she came back and she said, look, Breon, among my school books was this copy of King Lear.
Look at it.
She opened it up and it says Samuel Beckett with his address and the date.
And on the title page is the word catastrophe, which of course is a word that relates technically to tragic drama.
at the moment of turn in the tragic drama, Catastrophe.
It also happens to be the title of a play by Samuel Beckett, a play that he dedicated to Václav Havel, the president of the Czech Republic.
How old do you think Beckett was when he had been?
Well, we know exactly how old he was, but he would have been probably 14 or 15 when he was doing this, maybe a little younger, 14, maybe a little younger.
He covered everything.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Yeah, oh, you're welcome.
I'm sorry.
No, no, and Joel's coming up all the time.
Timing is just right.